So, next, we're gonna talk about memory.
And the reason we're gonna talk about
memory is, basically, not because this is
something that's really important to know
about for this particular section, but
rather because, we're going to start
introducing the concept of memory as
a way to build up to an understanding
of Rust's Baro checker.
So, all the stuff we're gonna be
talking about with regards to memory,
it's kind of useful to know
in terms of performance and
just kind of how things
work under the hood.
But the main motivation here is that we're
building up to something that will be
helpful to you later on when we get to
later sections about the Baro checker, and
how to understand the error
messages that it's giving you.
So, I know that people who are taking this
course will have different backgrounds.
I don't want to assume anyone has
any computer science background or
knows how memory works or
anything like that.
So, we're gonna start with a sort of
very bare bones explanation of how this
stuff works.
So, you can think of memory as
a whole bunch of bits, 1s and 0s.
So, a bit refers to, either, a 0 or a 1.
And you can think of, conceptually,
the memory in your computer is just
a big long list of these 0s and 1s.
Just like a lot of 0s,
a lot of 1s, back to back.
Some of them are 0, some of them are 1.
But 0s and 1s are not that useful.
We wanna talk about things like strings
and numbers that are bigger than 1.
So, how do we get those?
Well, the answer is that, basically,
when we're looking at this, the program is
interpreting sequences of 0s and 1s as
something more interesting than that.
The smallest unit of this is, usually,
what's called a byte, which is 8 bits.
So, here we have the byte number 1 in this
example memory that I've written out here,
and it's 11110011.
And as it happens, sorry, then the next
8 bits are byte 2 is gonna be 01101011.
And we've just decided that,
this is how I'm gonna organize it.
We're gonna have one byte,
followed by another bite.
Okay, sure, this is just a way
of interpreting these bits.
And you can imagine there's a third byte,
and a fourth byte, and so on and so forth.
So, as it happens, 11110011, in binary,
translates to 243 in decimal, which is
the number that we're all familiar with.
And these 1s and 0s translate 107.
We're not gonna get into how to translate
binary numbers into decimal numbers.
You can, read up about that
if you're curious about it.
But the point is that, in memory, actually
what's there is a whole bunch of 1s and
0s, but, we choose to interpret that
memory in different ways in order to
get more useful values out of them.
It's really just a way of
choosing to interpret that.
If you imagine, we could just interpret
the first 16 bytes of something instead of
separating the, I'm sorry,
the first 16 bits, those 1s and 0s,
as something rather than chopping
them up into bytes like this.
All of those are totally fair options.
Okay, so, I've sort of extended this out.
So this one's 243, then the next
eight bits are 107, then 117.
I've basically written out, so
here's some bytes in memory.
Just remember that,
it's backed by 1s and 0s.
But, in this case, we're really only gonna
be concerned with these bytes, here,
in memory.
So, you can kinda think of this
bytes representation of memory,
as it's something like a u8 array,
and like array of u8s.
u8 being an 8-bit unsigned integer,
namely a byte.
So, this would be the first element
in the array, the first byte,
this is the next one,
and so on and so forth.
And this is just a reasonable mental
model to have of, essentially,
how memory is represented in terms
of just a long sequence of bytes.
If you wanted to, though,
you could also say, you know what?
I wanna treat this as a u16 array.
And then, the first element is here, which
would actually be, if I took those same
bits that we had before and interpreted
them as a 16-bit unsigned integer.
That would be, instead of two
different numbers of 243 and 107,
those same 1s and 0s could be
interpreted as 62,315, if we wanted to.
Then, the next element in that u16 array,
would be over here, and then and so on and
so forth.
So, basically, this is just an example of,
we can look at the same 1s and 0s,
and conceptualize them as different
types of numbers, or strings, or,
basically, anything we want to.
It's all 1s and 0s under the hood.
And it's really a matter of just, how our
program chooses to interpret those 1s and
0s, to do something useful.
Okay, so, let's say that we have a u16
array that is exactly three elements long.
So, we talked about arrays
have to have a fixed length.
So, here we have u16; 3, and
here are the three numbers in there.
So, here's our first element.
Here's our second element.
Here's our third element.
This is a perfectly reasonable
thing that we could have in memory.
Alternatively, we can also say,
I wanna have a u32, which is even bigger.
So, this is like interpreting
four bytes at a time, now.
And this would be the first on this,
and this would be the second one.
But, for example, let's stick with
just u16 and kind of go with that.
So, here's another thing that's
interesting about this, in memory,
that three-element u16 array,
has exactly the same memory
representation as a tuple with
three u16 sites, exactly the same.
There is absolutely no difference
in the memory between these two.
And you also notice that
there's no overhead.
So, in a lot of languages, particularly,
object-oriented languages, when you have
an object, let's say in memory, it's not
just storing the data about the object.
There's extra memory being
used to store things like,
what are the fields on this object?
So, you can change them
at runtime if you want.
Or metadata about,
what's the class of this object?
So, you can ask, at runtime,
what's the class of this thing?
Rust, really, as we talked about,
optimizes for performance, so
there was no overhead here.
Literally for either a tuple or an array,
it's just the numbers themselves in
memory, in adjacent memory slots.
That is it,
there is zero overhead to either of those.
So, point.0, point.1, point.2,
instead of (0), (1), (2),
from a memory perspective, they're exactly
the same thing, tuple versus array.
And actually a struct,
exactly the same thing too.
Because, really, a struct is, essentially,
just syntax sugar for a tuple, in Rust.
It's a way of getting something
that works and, essentially,
the same way, at runtime,
as a tuple, except,
you're specifying the value is in terms
of labels, rather than in terms of slots.
So, if we have this point here,
we say, pt.x is this first slot,
y is the second one,
and z is the third one.
And this is why, when you're using structs
in Rust, it always wants you to write out
the word point when you're destructuring
it or when you're creating one.
Is because, it needs to know which
order to put these in, in memory.
Cuz this, actually, can have a very
subtle effect on performance, sometimes.
It wants to know, hey, is x supposed to
be the first one, or the second one, or
the third one?
I know you've got three of these things,
but which order should they go in?
And the order that you define them in
the struct is actually how they're
going to be laid out in the memory.
So, that's why the compiler asks you
to write out the word point, is so
that it knows how to lay these things out.
Cuz, again, Rust wants to have
as little overhead as possible.
And, as we've seen, Rust tuples,
structs, and arrays,
they're all represented exactly
the same way in memory,
with exactly the same overhead,
which is to say, no overhead, at all.
So, all three of these things,
the tuple version, the struct version, and
the array version,
exactly the same overhead,
exactly the same bytes in memory,
same 0s and 1s.
They're really, totally,
indistinguishable to a running program.
They just have different semantics
depending on how you wanna use them and
what's convenient for you in your code.
So, this is sort of our first
taste of memory in Rust, and
just getting a sense of how things work.
But this is gonna be
kind of an indication of,
you can see how Rust is able to
be faster than other languages.
It's not that Rust has, necessarily,
some sort of magical thing that lets
it be faster than the hardware.
It's actually the opposite.
It's that, Rust tries to give you these
nice conveniences, at compile time, so,
it feels like you have a lot of
different features in the language.
But, at runtime, it's basically saying,
we want to have no overhead compared to if
you were writing assembly language,
as little overhead as possible.
We're not gonna store one single bit extra
than is necessary to represent these
numbers in memory.
And that's kind of Rust,
in a nutshell, and
how it achieves the performance it does.